The Joe Rogan experience.
You you've always been a staunch advocate for free speech,
even when that speech is hate speech. And, uh, that's a, that's a very,
it's a difficult argument for people to have in this day and age because people
want ban hate speech. They wanna ban people from talking.
You've always been an, an advocate for free speech and saying that like,
even though it seems like it's a good idea to ban these ideas or to ban people
discussing these things. In fact, it actually turns out to be a terrible idea.
Well, you see, when people say they wanna ban hate speech,
what they mean is they wanna band a speech that they hate. Yes.
But if you allowed something called hate speech
to be banned,
then the only important question would be who decides.
And again, if the government is gonna be the one to decide what hate,
hate speech to ban,
it's not gonna be the same speech as the speech you hate.
It's gonna be the speech they hate. Um, think if, again,
for liberals who are very hot these days about banning hate speech,
what they mean is they want to ban speech that is bigoted against
people based on skin color or based on sex or based on religion.
That's what they mean by hate speech.
But what I always ask liberals is, well,
what makes you think you are gonna have the power to decide what's hateful.
You're never the ones who are gonna have the power.
What would happen if the guy who decided what speech to hate
and Ben was Joe McCarthy, he would've banned your speech.
What if it was Giuliani who tried unsuccessfully?
When he was mayor of New York to ban art in the Brooklyn,
a museum of art that he didn't like,
because he thought it was disrespectful of his religion. Um,
uh, and he hated that speech. Now, the speech he hated,
wasn't the same speech that I hated the speech. He hated.
Wasn't the same speech as, uh, as liberals or progressives hated,
but he was the one who and decide not they. Um,
and that's, you know, that's the problem.
That's really why hate speech cannot be a category, uh,
that is allowed to bend because it all depends on who's gonna decide.
And what they hate is not gonna be the same as what you hate. Um,
in the 19 nine, uh,
there was a big move on a lot of college campuses to ban hate speech.
And what they meant by that is they wanted to ban racist speech.
And a lot of black students were in favor of it. And I,
I was then ahead of the,
a C L U and I used to go around speaking to these audiences. And I had a,
a very substantial reputation as being an advocate for racial justice
and affirmative action and, and, uh, and all that. Uh, uh,
so I was sort of on their side and they knew that, uh,
in terms of the substance <affirmative>, but I use,
I didn't preach to them about the first amendment.
I used to ask those black students,
if you succeed in getting your university to ban hate
speech, what do you think is gonna happen next?
You think you are gonna be the ones to decide,
or do you think the board of trustees is gonna be the one to decide?
And the board of trustees are white and the board of trustees don't share your
politics. And the truth of the matter is if,
if there had been hate speech codes on college campuses in the 1960s,
their most frequent victim, would've been Malcolm X, not David Duke.
And the kids would look at me like they had never thought of it that way,
but that's the problem.
The problem is always who gets to define what's hateful and who
gets to decide what to ban.
And it isn't often gonna be the ones who advocate for these codes.
Um, <affirmative>, you know, the same thing happened in England in 1973, when,
when the national student union banned hates speech, uh, uh,
banned racist speech, uh, from college campuses in, in England.
And, um, uh, uh, a group of, uh,
Zionist kids who were among the, uh,
leaders of the national student movement at the time, uh, were all for that.
And then a few years later, a very few years later, um, uh,
the, the, the, the students changed, there were different students deciding,
and they decided to ban a Zionist speaker on the grounds. They,
they said that Zionism was a form of racism. Well,
the Zionist kids who had supported those hate speech bands,
they didn't think that Zionism was a form of racism,
but a few years later,
a majority of the national student union did so think.
And so the very hate speech band that these kids supported
ended up being used against their own speakers.
Uh, there are hundreds of examples like that.
And the reason why these bands don't work is,
is that nobody can define what hate speech is,
and it all ends up coming down to who decides,
and most often it ain't you.
Yeah. I, I mean,
I can completely understand the position that a social media company would have,
where they wouldn't want to have what consider hate speech on their platform,
because they think it reflects poorly on them. And they also think that it, um,
it radicalizes young people, it gets young people to,
to think along the same lines, if they're very charismatic and they're enticing,
they could get young people to grow, join what they believe are hate groups.
Right. But what, so is the solution,
just leave everything up and let everybody just kind of duke it out in the town
square of ideas.
Well, I, I, I think so.
And the reason I think that is that the only alternative
is to give somebody the power to decide what should be excluded from
the town square. And who is that somebody, right. You know,
I don't think you can get out of that dilemma. Um, uh, you know,
at the very beginning of our history, uh, uh,
when the first amendment was first invented, uh,
we all learned in school that people like James Madison and Tom Jefferson and
the rest of them were all these super advocates of free speech and first
amendment, but they weren't. Um,
a lot of them believed that the first amendment did not protect full speech,
because the way, the same way that people, how about, about hate speech is,
well, what does the virtue of false speech,
why does false speech contribute anything, uh, to a rational discussion?
Uh, how does false speech, uh, uh, enhance democracy? So they,
they, there was largely a consensus at the beginning of the 18th at the, uh, uh,
end of the 18th century, uh, when, when the country there was largely a,
a consensus, even among the, the, um, the, the,
the, the fiercest advocates of free speech,
that full speech was not protected by the first amendment.
Then under John Adams presidency,
the second pre of the United States, um,
they passed something called the alien inition acts,
and this was a federal statute that Congress passed.
And it, it, um, uh,
it made it a crime to say false things,
critically things about the president.
And the problem was is that it was the president who
decided to whom that law should apply.
So it ended up that people who were, uh,
critical of John Adams, including a, a member of Congress,
including several editors of newspapers, including, you know,
lots of people who were, they, they were arrested and convicted and sent to jail
under this. And why did that happen?
It happened because the people in charge said that their speech was false.
The, the speech of the people that they prosecuted. And, you know,
when people think of true or false, they think of things like, well,
if you say two plus two is five, we know that two plus two is four.
So two plus two is five is false, but in the world of politics,
almost everything can be interpreted as true or false,
depending on who the speaker and who the listener is,
look at what just happened with, with our elections. Um,
70% of people in this, uh, uh,
among Republicans leave that the election was fraudulent.
Now you can argue about whether that's true or whether that's false,
but do you really wanna make it a crime for people to say
that the election was fraudulent? You have to fight it out.
You have to duke it out. Um,
otherwise you're gonna end up using these bands as weapons,
uh, to use against people you don't agree with, uh,
by simply claiming that what they said was false. That was the history in the,
in the early part of, of, uh, of the American experiment.
And the same, the thing is true today about hate speech or a bigoted speech,
or any other kind of speech. You know, you,
the price we pay for having the freedom
to speak and listen and argue is that some of the stuff
we have to hear is ugly
and it's like an insurance policy.
And what we're insuring against is if we don't want to hear the ugly speech,
if we want to ban ugly speech,
we give the government the power to decide what's ugly enough to be banned,
and then we'll lose our own rights to free speech. For sure. And there,
I don't think there's any way out of that. Um, it's not intuitive. You know,
I used to say, I, I was a kid who grew up in the streets of Brooklyn.
If somebody called me a dirty Jew, uh, uh,
or insulted my mother or, or anything else. I mean,
there were two responses you didn't argue with.
I didn't know about free speech when I was 11 years old on the streets in, uh,
if somebody insulted you or said something bigoted to you, you had two choices,
you punched them out, or you ran if they were bigger than you,
or there was more of them than you, uh, free speech is an inquired taste.
It's something you learn about later. Um, it's something I didn't understand,
really. I really,
until I got to the a C L U and began to come to grips with these kinds of
problems we're discussing now, was it an.
Easy thing to come to grips with? Or did you go back and forth with it? Like,
was this like a.
No, it's, it's,
it's not an easy thing to come to grips with because it's not intuitive. I mean,
you know, the first time I saw, um,
people from the clan talking or neo-Nazis talking,
my first instinct was I wanted to take a club and beat them over the head.
I mean, how could, how could your first instinct not be that? Um,
uh, but I began to see that the consequences of that
was to give the government,
which was often gonna be
in the hands of people that didn't like what I believed, um,
to give the government the power,
to decide who to beat over the head and for what speech.
And I began to see pretty quickly as you come to grips with these in real life
cases,
that if you give the government the power to decide what speech is ugly enough
to be banned, it will as often be your speech,
as it will be the speech that you don't like. And that powerless people,
people who are discriminated against, uh, black people,
women gay people, Jews, Muslim, uh,
political minorities, so socialists, uh,
communists, whatever. Uh,
those are never the people who get to decide what speech to ban.
They are the victims of the speech bans, uh,
because the people who get to decide are, are more often,
as I keep saying more often gonna be people like Joe McCarthy and Richard
mixing and, and, uh, uh, and, and, and Trump, and,
and why would we want to trust? Why would black lives matter?
Protestors want to trust their speech rights
to somebody like Donald Trump?
Why would right wing, uh,
people want to trust their speech rights to Bernie Sanders
say, um, and you know,
this doesn't often just break down on liberal conservative lines.
I mean, remember that, that, you know, in the,
and one of the worst atrocities of civil liberties that this country has ever
seen, uh, Americans, American citizens of Japanese descent,
um, these were not aliens. These were not immigrants. These were, you know,
these were American citizens of Japanese descent. Uh,
not one of whom was ever charged with anything criminal
or with anything treasonous or with anything traits.
120,000 of them were plucked from their jobs and their homes
and their businesses,
and sent off to camps for the duration of the war for no other reason than,
than the ASC descendant from Japanese people.
And this was done by Franklin Del or Roosevelt, you know? So,
so the fact is you can never trust the powerful
with your civil Liberty. That's true about speech,
and it's true about all civil liberties. Um,
power is the antagonist, not, not Republicans,
not Democrats. Um, power is the antagon and whoever has it,
uh, is a danger to civil liberties. If they're not restrained.
And one of the strengths
is in the first amendment to the constitution,
which says Congress shall make no law that it
bridges speech. Now, you know, no law means no law.
It doesn't mean some laws. And it doesn't mean, oh, well, bad laws.
They can abridge, but, but not,
not good laws because you can't trust what they decide is good and what they
decide is bad. So, yeah, I, I think,
I do think you gotta duke it out with words and the line between what's
permissible and what's not permissible needs to be between speech and conduct.
Catch new new episodes. The Joe Rogan experience for free only on Spotify,
watch back catalog J E videos on Spotify,
including clips easily seamlessly switch between video
and audio experience on Spotify.
You can listen to the JRE in the background while using other apps and can
download episodes to save on data cost. All for free.
Spotify is absolutely free.
You don't have to have a premium account to watch new JRE episodes.
You just need to search for the JRE on your Spotify app.
Go to Spotify now to get this full episode of the Joe Rogan experience.